Add developer documentation to explain room DAG concepts like `outliers` and `state_groups` (#10464)
matrix-org/synapse: docs/development/room-dag-concepts.md

# Room DAG concepts

## Edges

The word "edge" comes from graph theory lingo. An edge is just a connection
between two events. In Synapse, we connect events by specifying their
`prev_events`. A subsequent event points back at a previous event.

```
A (oldest) <---- B <---- C (most recent)
```

## Depth and stream ordering

Events are sorted by `(topological_ordering, stream_ordering)` where
`topological_ordering` is just `depth`. In other words, we first sort by `depth`
and then tie-break based on `stream_ordering`. `depth` is incremented as new
messages are added to the DAG. Normally, `stream_ordering` is an auto

> incrementing integer but for `backfilled=true` events, it decrements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
incrementing integer, but backfilled events start with `stream_ordering=-1` and decrement.
```

> `depth` is not re-calculated if a message is inserted into the middle of the DAG.

Reviewer: `depth` is an inherent property of the event - it's calculated by the originating server as `max(e.depth for e in prev_events)+1`, and it is then covered by the signature (and therefore set in stone).

Author: Woah! I was under the impression that it was a just a field that Synapse calculated to make the slicing and dicing of all events easier.

From the client perspective it doesn't even exist: https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/client-server-api/ 

But I do see some mentions from the server API: https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/server-server-api/ 

Why don't I see when I inspect the original source of an event in Element for example? Where is it stored on the event? Any docs?

---

The reason I mentioned that line in the first place is because during the MSC2716 talks, there was some discussion of doing some major refactoring so that the `depth` is calculated. Maybe this was meant for a future MSC vs a homeserver implementation 😕

> So having rediscussed this IRL: Dendrite (and Synapse) currently get their `depth` parameters used for ordering from the wire. Ideally, we'd calculate the depth parameter instead
>
> https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r559828899

Relates to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1229

Reviewer: > Why don't I see when I inspect the original source of an event in Element for example? 

Well, therein lies a complication. The format of events served up to clients is not quite the same as those that get passed around between homeservers. I opened https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/3305 to clarify this.

> The reason I mentioned that line in the first place is because during the MSC2716 talks, there was some discussion of doing some major refactoring so that the `depth` is calculated.

Well yes, it would be nice if we didn't have to trust remote homeservers to tell us the depth of an event, either by calculating it ourselves (somehow) or, more likely, avoiding our dependence on it. But that's all a bit sci-fi at the moment, and if you're writing Synapse developer docs, I think it's better to make them reflect current reality than future aspirations.

---

 - `/sync` returns things in the order they arrive at the server (`stream_ordering`).
 - `/backfill` returns them in the order determined by the event graph `(topological_ordering, stream_ordering)`.

> The general idea is that, if you're following a room in real-time (i.e. `/sync`), you probably want to see the messages as they arrive at your server, rather than skipping any that arrived late; whereas if you're looking at a historical section of timeline (i.e. `/messages`), you want to see the best representation of the state of the room as others were seeing it at the time.

Author: Lifted this text from @richvdh,

 - https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/7164#issuecomment-605877176
 - https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/7164#issuecomment-605953296

> The general idea is that, if you're following a room in real-time (i.e. `/sync`), you probably want to see the messages as they arrive at your server, rather than skipping any that arrived late; whereas if you're looking at a historical section of timeline (i.e. `/messages`), you want to see the best representation of the state of the room as others were seeing it at the time.

Reviewer: wrap at 80 chars please.

## Forward extremity

> Most-recent-in-time events in the DAG which are not referenced by any `prev_events` yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most-recent-in-time events in the DAG which are not referenced by any other events' `prev_events` yet.
```

The forward extremities of a room are used as the `prev_events` when the next event is sent.

## Backwards extremity

The current marker of where we have backfilled up to.

> A backwards extremity is a place where the oldest-in-time events of the DAG

Reviewer: I think this sentence has got lost and can be removed?

Author: Good spot! I've combined it with the sentence above ⏩

This is an event where we haven't fetched all of the `prev_events` for.

> Once we have fetched all of it's `prev_events`, it's unmarked as backwards

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we have fetched all of its `prev_events`, it's unmarked as a backwards
```

> extremity and those `prev_events` become the new backwards extremities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extremity.
```

The `prev_events` probably don't themselves become backwards extremities, for two reasons:

1. normally we backfill in batches (of 20 events or so, iirc?) so, assuming a linear timeline, the new backwards extremity will be 20 events back up the timeline.

2. More subtly, imagine a DAG like this (sorry for terrible ascii art, hopefully you get the idea):

```
A <--  B <-- C <-- E
^                /
 \--- ( D ) <---
```

To start with, `D` is missing, so `E` is a backwards extremity. This isn't that unusual - it can happen whenever there's a fork in the DAG and we can't talk to D's server for some reason. Then we backfill, retrieving `D`. *Neither* of `E`'s prev-events (`C` and `D`) become backwards extremities, because we already have all their prev-events.

Author: Thanks for the good context here! I think this would be good to explain. I've added a `(unless we have already persisted them)` qualifying statement to it and also an "in reality" sentence to describe the batched backfills ⏩

## Depth and stream ordering

Events are normally sorted by `(topological_ordering, stream_ordering)` where
`topological_ordering` is just `depth`. In other words, we first sort by `depth`
and then tie-break based on `stream_ordering`. `depth` is incremented as new
messages are added to the DAG. Normally, `stream_ordering` is an auto
incrementing integer, but backfilled events start with `stream_ordering=-1` and decrement.

---

 - `/sync` returns things in the order they arrive at the server (`stream_ordering`).

>  - `/messages` (and `/backfill in the federation API) return them in the order determined by the event graph `(topological_ordering, stream_ordering)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `/messages` (and `/backfill` in the federation API) return them in the order determined by the event graph `(topological_ordering, stream_ordering)`.
```

The general idea is that, if you're following a room in real-time (i.e.
`/sync`), you probably want to see the messages as they arrive at your server,
rather than skipping any that arrived late; whereas if you're looking at a
historical section of timeline (i.e. `/messages`), you want to see the best
representation of the state of the room as others were seeing it at the time.

## Forward extremity

Most-recent-in-time events in the DAG which are not referenced by any other events' `prev_events` yet.

The forward extremities of a room are used as the `prev_events` when the next event is sent.

## Backwards extremity

The current marker of where we have backfilled up to and will generally be the
oldest-in-time events we know of in the DAG.

This is an event where we haven't fetched all of the `prev_events` for.

Once we have fetched all of its `prev_events`, it's unmarked as a backwards

> extremity and those `prev_events` become the new backwards extremities (unless
> we have already persisted them). Also in reality, we backfill in batches of 20
> events or so, so only the `prev_events` of the last oldest-in-time event will
> become the backwards extremeties.

Reviewer: I think this is a bit confusing. How about:

```suggestion
extremity (although we may have formed new backwards extremities during the backfilling process).
```

Author: 👍 I tweaked it slightly to include the prev event chain,

> Once we have fetched all of its `prev_events`, it's unmarked as a backwards
extremity (although we may have formed new backwards extremities from the prev
events during the backfilling process).

mark all of those claimed auth events as outliers because we haven't done the
state calculation ourself.

> Outliers are sometimes referred to as floating outliers but there is no

Reviewer: I've never heard them referred to as that...

Author: Maybe it was just a descriptor that came out of the intro discussions for discussing how MSC2716 could work. Can remove ⏩
